# Loan-Data
# (A RESEARCH/ANALYSIS ON LOAN DATA RECORDS FROM PROSPER LOAN COMPANY)
## by (Ebenezer Mayowa, PEACE)


## Dataset

> This data set contains 113,937 loans with 81 variables on each loan, including loan amount, borrower rate (or interest rate), current loan status, borrower income, and many others. The analysis in this worksheet/notebook would be structured to enable us provide univariate, bivariate and multivariate relationships, this research would provide answers to questions like how many homeowners borrow in a state, which year has the highest rate of borrowing homeowners, which state has the highest amount of borrowing homeowners, is there a correlation between your available bank credit and your borrowing capacity, identifying the frequency of the categorical variables; Term of loan, Borrower's employment status, year of loan, and loan status, are there differences between loans depending on the loan term?. The data set consist of 113,937 rows and 81 columns, implying 113,937 recorded observations with 81 features. The main features of interest to this study include but not limited to the following; loan status, loan term, employment Status, is borrower a homeowner or not, borrower state, income verifiable or not and occupation. To get a better understanding of how this features of interest would be investigated a number of features would support this study which include the following features original loan amount, loan origination date, monthly loan payment, loan current days of delinquency, stated monthly income, investors and recommendations. In total 11 features were pulled together and form into a new dataframe to be reference for exploration and analysis. To analyse the loan with respect the year, the loan origination date column was converted from object datatype to datetime, afterwards the year was extracted from the datetime before setting the data type of the extracted year column as categorical variable, also the loan term values was trasform from the original values 12months, 36months, and 60months to short term, medium term and long term respectively to make for a better behavior as a categorical variable. The loan status has values respresenting past due in a number of categories of days, these values were replaced with a single value named 'past due' regardless of the number of days. The borrower state values were transformed from state abbrevation to full text without leaving out the stated monthy income and monthy loan payment variable out from transformation, these variables were converted from float to integer for consistency with the loan amount data type.


## Summary of Findings

> To analyse the loan with respect the year, the loan origination date column was converted from object datatype to datetime, afterwards the year was extracted from the datetime before setting the data type of the extracted year column as categorical variable, also the loan term values was trasform from the original values 12months, 36months, and 60months to short term, medium term and long term respectively, it was also changed to a categorical data type to enable easy analyzation. The loan status has values respresenting past due in a number of categories of days, these values were replaced with a single value named 'past due' regardless of the number of days. The borrower state values were transformed from their abbreviated text to full text to enable easy comprehension by non native researchers, we also did not leave out the stated monthy income and monthy loan payment variable out. These variables were converted from float to integer for consistency with the loan amount data type. The occupation column was transformed from object data type to categorical data type.

> For the distribution of term, loans disbursed on the medium term has the highest occurence, Employed individuals borrowed the most, followed by the full time category. Year 2013 had the highest number of loan disbursement, followed by the year 2012 and 2014 respectively at second and third position, the least loan disbursement occured in the year 2005 with a occurence of 22 loan disbursement. There was not much difference between if a borrower is a home owner or not and loans were only disbursed to those whose income were verifiable. The distibution of the loan original amount is right-skewed, a case of symmetrical distribution. Most of the loan original amount are clustered on the left side of the histogram. The peak of the original loan amount occurs at about 5000 dollars, there are outliers in the ranges of 32000 dollars and 35000 dollars. The distribution of monthly loan payment is right-skewed, a case of symmetrical distribution. Most of the monthly loan payment are clustered on the left side of the histogram. The peak of the original loan amount occurs at about 173 dollars.

> I wanted to check if a borrower status as a home owner will affect the loan Status as being paid or not but found out, it did not really affect it. The current loan status; the highest, shows that home owners are borrowers too. The medium term has the highest occurence of loan duration in the distribution from earlier findings, how much does this spread over the loan status category is what the figure above depicts, for the current loan status 20127 were on long term, 36387 were on medium term while just 62 were on the short term. The past due category has a spread of 684 long term duration, 1373 medium term duration, and 10 short term duration. other categories can be visualized from the figure above. Home owners whose occupations were verifiable were 54073 and those whose werent are 3405. Meaning a larger percentage of home owners also has their income verifiable.The current loan status 30478 are home owners, while 26098 were not home owners. The past due category has a spread of 1003 home ownership, and 1064 no home ownership. The completed loan status category has home ownership of 18280 while 19794 does not own a home.The loan original amount has the highest mean value in the year 2014 with a lowest mean value in the year 2005, for the stated monthly income the year 2005 has the highest mean value while year 2008 has the lowest mean value.The loan original amount has the highest mean value in the current loan status category and a lowest mean value in the cancelled loan category, for the stated monthly income the loan status final payment in progress has the highest mean value with loan status cancelled with the lowest mean values.There is no positive correlation between stated monthly income and loan original amount, as the original loan amount increases the monthly loan payment also increases, meaning there is a rush to pay off the loan as quickly as possible which means, there is a positive correlation between our two variables. From year 2005 to mid-2008 and 2010, there was a shar increase in investors invloved in the loan business, but this dropped from mid 2008 to 2014.

> Lastly, From earlier findings there existed a positive relationship between the loan original amount and monthly loan payment, the data point are spread across a scatterplot categorized by term of loan, year, verifiable income, home ownership, loan status, and employment status plotted on different scatter plot to better depict the spread. We could also deduce from the findings the correlation of continuous numerical variable by the heatmap, we could see we have a positive correlation between loan original amount and monthly loan payment with a correlation coefficient of 0.93, the stated monthly income and the original loan amount seems to have no correlation between them as well as the income verifiable and the Loans Current Days deliquent column. I just had to make sure it was correct by crosschecking using the Multivariate Exploration option



## Key Insights for Presentation

> The distribution of loan original amount is right-skewed, a case of symmetrical distribution. Most of the loan original amount are clustered on the left side of the histogram. The peak of the original loan amount occurs at about 5000 dollars, there exist outliers in the ranges between 32000 dollars and 35000 dollars, the data spread is from about 1000 dollars to 3500 dollars, while that of monthly loan payment is also right-skewed, a case of symmetrical distribution. Most of the monthly loan payment are clustered on the left side of the histogram. The peak of the original loan amount occurs at about 173 dollars, the data spread is from about zero dollars to 2251 dollars. Loans disbursed on the medium term in this case 36months has the highest occurence with a count of 87778 representing about 77 percent of loan term duration, leaving the other 23 percent distributed between the long term (60 months) and short term (12 months)loan duration. Those who are employed has the highest occurence in the employment status category with a count of 69557, those who are retired got the lowest occurence in the employment status category, it's more likely to disburse a laon to working class compare to a retired individual. The year 2013 had the highest number of loan disbursment with a occurence of 34345, followed by the year 2012 and 2014 respectively at second and third position, the least loan disbursement occured in the year 2005 with a occurence of 22 loan disbursement.
>The loan status data distribution further indicates that few borrowewrs cancelled their loans and that majority of the borrowers has a current an serviceable loan, those who defaulted in servicing their loan are about 10 percent of those who have current and seervicable laon. Those borrowers who are past due has one or more due day. The distribution of the loan original amount plotted on a box to visualize the skewness to the right and with outliers indicated with an astericks out of the whiskers. The 25th percentile of the loan original amount variable falls slightly before 5000 dollars, while the median falls above the 5000 dollars, the 75th percentile falls short of 15000 dollars. The distribution of the monthly loan payment plotted on boxplot to visualize the skewness to the right and with outliers indicated with an astericks out of the whiskers. The 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile of the monthly loan payment variable falls short of 500 dollars. The  distribution of the investors plotted on a boxplot to visualize the skewness to the right and outliers indicated with an astericks out of the whiskers. The 25th percentile, median and 75th percentile of the investors variable falls short of 200 investors.
Deducing the correlation of continuous numerical variable by the heatmap, we could visualize that there's a positive correlation between loan original amount and monthly loan payment with a correlation coefficient of 0.93, the stated monthly income and the original loan amount seems to have no positive correlation between them. From earlier findings there exist a positive relationship between the loan original amount and monthly loan payment, the data point are spread across a scatterplot categorized by term of loan, year, verifiable income, home ownership, loan status, and employment status plotted on different scatter plot to better depict the spread.
Evaluating the mean distribution of loan original amount and stated monthly income group by categorical variables year and loan status it was discovetred the loan original amount has the highest mean value in the current loan status category and a lowest mean value in the cancelled loan category, for the stated monthly income the loan status final payment in progress has the highest mean value with loan status cancelled with the lowest mean values. The loan original amount has the highest mean value in the year 2014 with a lowest mean value in the year 2005, for the stated monthly income the year 2005 has the highest mean value with year 2008 with the lowest mean value.
